What does cancer mean to be
characterized as a metabolic disease?
>> That essentially means that the
disregulated growth which is cancer is
being driven by an abnormal metabolism
uh which is distinct from the mutations
that you see in the tumor. So the m the
mutations are effects of the abnormal
metabolism.
So the tumor cells
have to um transition the tumor cells
have an inefficient oxidative
phosphorilation consequently
requiring a compensatory
fermentation which we refer to as
substrate level phosphorilation
and the abnormal growth is the result of
the inability of the mitochondria of the
tumor cell to generate uh energy and
calcium flux which leads to disregulated
cell growth and driven driven by a
fermentation metabolism. It might sound
a little complicated, but the gene
mutations that you see are all
downstream effects of this abnormal
metabolism. So the key is if we know
what causes cancer and we know how to
manage cancer. Well, if we know what
causes it, uh we should be able to
manage it effectively by restricting the
fuels that drive the abnormal uh the
abnormal energy production. So, um,
yeah, so they can't burn fatty acids or
ketones. They're driven by the glucose,
the sugar glucose and the amino acid
glutamine, uh, because it's a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder. So,
now we know how they start and how to
manage them. Cancer, all cancers are the
same disease, a singular disease.
>> And and when you're looking at the the
cancer field in general, who doesn't
really think like you on this matter?
Uh, what are the major kind of
roadblocks that prevent them from seeing
cancer.
>> Um well, there's a lot and um there's
five major ones. Number one, uh
confirmation biased, which means um they
naturally uh uh they naturally stick to
their um indoctrinated beliefs uh where
they've been told that it's a genetic
disease and they can't accept the fact
that it's not. uh there's institutional
inertia. Academic and health care
systems themselves can resist change uh
because the uh entire department's
funding structures and educational
programs are built around established
theories and practices. So if that's not
correct, you know, you're you're
destabilizing an entire industry here.
Um or an institutional view uh career
investment. Many people have become
famous and rich uh on the idea that
cancer I is a genetic disease and when
it's not you're threatening their
revenue generation source. Um so you
have um uh strong consensus views to
maintaining the status quo. You don't
like to change the status quo. Everybody
is happy and backs slapping making a
large amount of money. The the only ones
not benefiting immensely are the
patients. And finally, um, paradigm
paralysis. Again, scientists and
physician often work under these
frameworks. And when the framework is no
longer accurate, you have, um, a big a
big problem here. And there's a very
great resistance, uh, to accepting
something that's different from what was
the paradigm.
>> Obviously, in cancer, uh, the thing that
really kills the most people is
metastasis, right?
>> Yeah. Metastasis
>> and the view of metastasis in the field.
Can you talk a little bit about the the
theories that have been used to explain
it like the the EMT the macroofage kind
of theory?
>> Well, there's two things responsible for
cancer the death of people. Number one
is the poisonous rate the poisonous
chemicals and the radiation. Uh almost
50% of cancer patients are killed by the
eventually die from the treatments. Uh
and if it's metastatic cancer uh that
will eventually kill the patient if
they're not treated. Um, so it's a
combination of the spread of the tumor
and the and the and as I said before the
medieval treatments that they use to
manage the cancer. All these metastatic
cancer cells are dependent on heavily
dependent on glucose and glutamine. So
if you target them uh with taking away
those two fuels you can kill them with
minimal if no or no toxicity. Um the the
crazy and fantastical um idea of cancer
the metastatic model is the epithelial
misenimal trans transition which we
refer to as the werewolf hypothesis. Um
it's hard to imagine that a series of
random mutations would would convert an
epithelial cell which is a very distinct
biological type of cell uh in into a
meenimal cell which is like a macroofage
or one of our immune cells. um which is
another very sophisticated kind of cell
develop having very different
developmental uh ideologies for these
two cells and then have this misenimal
cell uh take on very very sophisticated
biological processes like entering the
circulation uh suppressing the immune
system and then using very sophisticated
biological processes to exit the
bloodstream and set up a tumor at a
distant site. um all based on random
mutations which which is surprising
because all major metastatic cancers go
through a very very stereotypical
cascade. Uh they invade, they enter the
bloodstream, they suppress the immune
system, and they exit the blood
bloodstream regardless of what kind of
cancer you have. And and and the and
you're telling me that a series of
random events can create a very
stereotypical non-random event. So
that's why we call it the werewolf
hypothesis as if the the person were to
be transformed into a wolf a and then uh
beh transformed back into a normal
person. Think of the gene expression
changes that would have to happen. It's
nonsensical just as much as the
epithelium transition is nonsensical. So
that's and yet we're spending hundreds
of millions of dollars on a completely
nonsensical mechanism to explain
metastatic cancer when it's actually a
fusion hybridization between a
macroofage and a stem cell. And we know
that because all major metastatic
cancers express characteristics of
macrofagages, meaning that they
originated in one way or another from
macrofage. The macroofage needs
glutamine as a prime fuel. Take away the
glutamine and you will have a much
greater success in killing and killing
these metastatic cancers. So the
question is why is no one doing that?
Why is no one doing that? Because they
think it's a genetic disease. They're
locked into a solidification of the mind
based on an absolute absurd uh uh
concept. And as the result, what is the
result? 1,700 people a day dying from
cancer that don't have to die because of
these of these locked in absurdities in
the human mind of the people that are
working in the field.
>> How would you explain metastas
metastasis from a metabolic perspective?
Well, we have to look at the metastatic
cancer. How do you explain metastasis
from a metabolic perspective? Okay,
every major metastatic cancer itself is
using a large amount of glucose and a
large amount of glutamine. How do we
know? Do PET scans. When you do a PET
scan on somebody with metastatic cancer,
you're looking for spots all over the
body. Those spots are markers for the
tumor cells taking in large amounts of a
of a glucose um diagnostic. It's a it's
a it's a structural analog of glucose,
the sugar glucose that cannot be
metabolized. So, it collects in the
tumor cell and gives off a signal and
that signal tells you you have
metastatic cancer. But that signal is
also telling you the metastatic cancer
needs a large amount of glucose. And at
the same time, you're not seeing that
it's also using glutamine. So, so, so um
so we're we're looking at a cell that is
taking in glucose and glutamine. Where
did that cell come from? Well, it
certainly didn't come by the epithelial
misenal transition, which I just said is
absurdity uh based on our understanding
of of evolutionary biology. Um, and um
uh it's it's it's uh we have a lot of
evidence that macroofagages fuse with uh
other cells in an inflamed micro
environment. If you have cancer stem
cells in there which do lack the ability
to metastasize and they fuse with a a
normal macroofage, you get these fusion
hybrids which have the characteristics
of both the stem cell and the macroofage
and they become rogue macroofagages
fully capable of spreading around the
body and going to different organs. with
this view of cancer um you you propose a
more uh a more kind of a sensical
therapeutic approach given the
metabolism as opposed to you know
targeting mutations and all that. Um so
how do you envision the field of uh
metabolic therapies advancing? What do
we currently have and where do you see
the the kind of field going? We
currently with with treating cancer as a
metabolic disease, we we have a logical
uh uh solution or approach to manage the
disease without toxicity. Um we would
shrink the tumor down metabolically
first making extremely weak uh
potentially getting rid of the majority
of of tumor cells, killing them outright
with our press pulse therapeutic
strategy. And we can use radiation and
chemo at very low doses uh much lower
than what we currently use and
interspersing them um distributing them
over a different time frame uh because
the tumor cells become extremely
vulnerable uh to toxic standards of care
um uh when in a metabolically
compromised state. Uh so they're already
on the precipice of dying. You pull you
pull their two fuels, glucose and
glutamine, driving them for growth and
viability and now you pull that and
they're on the precipice of dying and
therefore a small dose of radiation or
even chemo could push them over the
threshold into death and we don't harm
the immune system comes in and picks up
the dead cancer cells. So we have a
clear strategy using either metabolic
therapy alone or metabolic therapy
combined with standards of care to
manage these tumors very effectively
with minimal if any toxicity. Obviously,
one cancer that the lab has focused on
is glyobblasto.
Um, and with a cancer that really hasn't
seen any any significant progress in
many many years. Um, and can you speak
to the progress that that kind of
metabolic therapy is doing for that
specific cancer and what the future
could be there?
>> Leoplasto has had no major advance in a
hundred years uh based on Bailey
Cushing's work. um the Cushing work from
1926.
Um the survival for GBM glyobblasto is
is roughly similar between 8 and 17
months. Um and and and a lot of that has
to do with the way the tumor is treated.
Uh radiation of the tumor in the brain
of a person will free up a massive
amount of glucose and glutamine. The two
fuels absolutely both necessary and
sufficient for maintaining disregulated
cell growth. So we're not we're not
going to get any major advance. I I I
don't want to say that if we if we do
metabolic therapy even though the
patient is irdiated and given toxic
teamomide poison um you you with
metabolic therapy we are already seeing
some positive benefits but the benefits
could be even greatly extended if you
didn't not irdiate the brain. So um I've
told people that we've published papers
showing how radiation actually
reduces the possibility or reduces the
opportunity to live longer. Um and that
and the beautiful stereotypic death that
you see from all major hospitals
throughout the world uh is due to this
the constant the same treatment the same
treat the same kind of treatment is
given to a glyopblasto patient
regardless of what country they live in.
They do a surgical debulking which is
necessary and then they irdiate the
brain and then they use a toxic poison
temolomide and then they use steroids to
to reduce the inflammation in the brain.
All of this creates a world a great
wonderful environment of glucose and
glutamine leading to the stereotypical
death of the majority of cancer of GBM
patients. The problem is they will not
stop doing this. Even when the evidence
is presented to them that the very
therapies they're using are are reducing
the possibility of of longer term
survival. Um they still mindlessly do
what they do because they've been doing
it for as long as they've been doing it
and it's generates tremendous revenue to
do that. So uh we know uh we we know all
the problems that are are behind this.
Unfortunately,
uh the field has not yet come to see the
light and we don't know how many more
GBM patients must die uh before they
begin to change the way the change the
the the procedures that they're using.
So it's the poor survival for
glyopblasto is based on on the medieval
approach to do this a lack of knowledge
on the biology and biochemistry of the
disease they're treating. And
unfortunately we have to sacrifice these
poor souls until the field comes to
realize uh what the nature of this
problem is because we can double triple
uh survival on on on GBM patients uh
using metabolic therapy and maybe small
doses of of the other processes but we
and there's no clinical trials on this
just a few case reports and there should
be uh larger to prove to prove the
point. What does a scientific paradigm
shift mean to you? And do you feel as if
one is is happening before your eyes
here or that you're driving that?
>> The paradigm shift has to happen if
people want to survive longer. Um, if
you keep the status quo where cancer is
killing, 1700 people a day, 70 people an
hour. It's projected to kill replace
heart disease in the next 20 years as
the number one killer of people on the
planet. Um and if people are happy with
that, if if the majority of people in
the world are excited by the fact that
uh cancer is continuing to uh become a
very worse disease than or more
prevalent than it already is, then we
will not change the paradigm. It's only
when the people of the world get angry
and start to uh make a change because we
already have a very clear strategy on
how to manage cancer without toxicity,
minimal if any toxicity. We know how to
do it. the case reports have shown that
pre-clinical studies are clearly
demonstrating this. Um we have many
cancer long-term cancer survivors that
have used metabolic therapy. So as long
as we're as long as we continue to
recognize cancer as a genetic disease,
uh the paradigm will not change. When
you realize that it's a mitochondrial
metabolic disease, the paradigm will
change and people will live longer with
a higher quality of life and this will
happen throughout the world. You know
why is this not changing? uh because of
the reasons that I told you confirmation
biased um you're disrupting revenue
generation there's all these different
things until people can can can
recognize that this is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease I don't think we're
going to see any major changes
>> I got a a hypothetical question for you
here um say that a massive
philanthropist or someone of value gives
you uh $20 million to run a trial
oncology trial and exactly the methods
that you propose for you know say any
cancer but what what are some of the
things that you would think have to be
there in that trial to uh you know not
just test out but to kind of treat
cancer medically
>> well we we already have written a
protocol on how to do this I mean we
we've put a big paper in in biomed
central medicine BM BMC medicine um you
know we we we have everybody has to be
upfront evaluated for their metabolic
homeostasis is because many cancer
patients are in are not in metabolic
homeostasis. They have diabetes, many
not all, high blood pressure,
hypertension. They have a lot of other
co-orbidities that the need to be
addressed at the same time the cancer
needs to be addressed. So people we need
an upfront uh workup of individuals. We
have to move them from a state of of
unhealth uh to health uh gradually by by
restricting the amount of carbs in their
body. And then we come in with a with a
barrage of these repurposed drugs that
work synergistically
uh with uh with the reduction of glucose
and the elevation of ketones. A and then
uh and this would have to be done by
people that are knowledgeable. You can't
run a clinical trial with people who
have no clue what the biology and
biochemistry of the diseases. So they
have to have educated people. you need a
staff of nutritionists, dieticians, uh
surgeons, and oncologists that all
understand precisely uh what the nature
of this problem is. Uh and right now to
do a big clinical trial when you do not
have a staff that understands the nature
of the problem, it's not likely to have
an outcome that will be as favorable as
it could if you had people that
understood what to do and how to do it.
So this is why we do small groups of
people in case report studies to
validate or show the power of what can
happen if done the correct way. Uh and
we're learning more and more. We have a
new society that we're starting the
international society of metabolic
oncology and the cross information from
the folks that are participating in that
will allow us to eventually develop very
effective large clinical trials. Say,
say people are hearing this uh research
or perhaps have even implemented
metabolic therapy to some to some level
in their own life with with or without
cancer. Um, and they feel very inclined
uh during this kind of month of of
cancer awareness uh to support cancer
research. But you're seeing all these,
you know, walks, these runs. Uh first of
all, where is all this money going when
someone says they're raising, you know,
money for cancer research? And two, if
they specifically want to fund help fund
uh cancer as a metabolic disease
research, where would they go to?
>> So, you see pink ribbons everywhere and
you see all these events that are
designed to raise large amounts of
money. Um, and the more money we raise
for breast cancer, the more breast
cancer and people dying from breast
cancer that we get. Uh, this was
documented by the American Cancer
Society. You can look at their data over
the years from 2013 to 2025 and you see
a constant increase in people dying, the
number of dead women and men from breast
cancer. So clearly the more money we
raise for breast cancer, the more breast
cancer we get. Um these these uh
fundraising organizations have placed um
have placed uh raising money as as an
end in itself uh rather than a means to
reduce the the the cancer that they're
raising money for. So people feel good
because they raised more money this year
than last year. Well, that's an end in
itself. The fact that you you raise more
money, but there's no accountability
where the money goes and why we raise
all this money year in and year out and
all we do is get more dead people. Um,
and that's a that's one of the great
tragedies. And then you have to ask the
organizations that raise money, what do
you do with the money? Are you investing
it in the in the in therapies based on
the sematic mutation gene theory or are
you investing it in in programs that
recognize cancer as a as a a metabolic
mitochondrial metabolic disease. And
when you find out that most of the money
is going to uh cancer re research
involving gene mutations. Now you can
understand why we have no progress and
we get more and more dead people year in
and year out because the money is being
misspent on on a therapy or a strategy
that's already been debunked. So until
people come to realize that, we're not
going to have any major change and
people will just feel good because they
run and they jump and they ride bikes
and they get healthy doing that. But the
the money is going to uh an
establishment that persists with a with
a failed uh paradigm leading to uh the
lack of progress. So um yeah, so you
have to sh you have to make sure people
know where the money is going and ask
very hard questions. How come how come
we get we not we're not dropping the
death rate? Why is that? And then these
people have to tell you, "Oh, well, it's
a hard disease to it's a no, it isn't.
It's a very easy disease to both prevent
prevent and treat because we now know
what to do and how to do it." You It's
very hard to get cancer if your
mitochondria healthy. So running and
jumping and doing all that thing is
helping the people who don't have cancer
stay cancer free because you're keeping
your mitochondria healthy. So when your
mitochondria we have an obesity epidemic
we have all these health issues damage
mitochondria get diabetes cancer and all
these other things as a result of
mitochondrial failure as a cause of
mitochondrial damage. So we absolutely
know number one we know how to prevent
cancer very effectively and number two
we know how to manage cancer very
effectively when you look at it as
mitochondrial metabolic disease. So you
have to ask the fundraisers are you
viewing cancer as a mitochondrial
metabolic disease or as a a sematic
genetic disease and the answer when and
that'll tell you why we have progress or
no progress
>> given all that uh someone wants to fund
uh research that is working on cancer
and metabolic disease.
>> Our funding uh is comes from
philanthropy and private foundations. So
the goodwill of people who are not
interested in in knowing they're going
to get something. is a no strings
attached philanthropy which means that
they want to support our work because
they know it's going to help millions of
people. Travis Kristofferson's
foundation for cancer metabolic
therapies we have the Annne Weeather's
Foundation for Breast Cancer that
supports us and we have a number of
other private foundations and
philanthropists who give money to these
foundations to support what we're doing.
And yeah, eventually they're it's going
to be recognized uh for what we're
saying. It's a metabolic disease. We do
pre-clinical studies. We validate all
the tests. Uh we we know what to how we
we constantly improve our preclinical
testing on all natural animal models and
then we immediately translate that to
the clinic and we can see remarkable
results. Humans do much better than the
the animal models and we're we're
constantly improving the the work on our
preclinical studies and then and then
we're we're improving it in the clinic.
Without our preclinical studies, none of
what I've been talking about would have
ever existed in the first place. Where
do our donations go to in the lab?
>> They go to the guys that are working on
our on our on our models, right? So,
they're supporting our undergraduates.
They're supporting our graduates and
they're supporting our professional
scientists all of work which who work
together as a team to uh to improve our
number one our understanding of the
basic concepts the basic biology and
biochemistry and in the improvement of
press pulse metabolic therapy so that we
can keep uh constantly improving overall
survival. And then we have uh our
colleagues uh clinical colleagues that
work with us that try to implement this
into the clinic or at least set up
programs where we can implement it in
the it.